When most people think of ethics (or morals), they think of rules for distinguishing between 
right and wrong, such as the Golden Rule ("Do unto others as you would have them do unto you"), 
a code of professional conduct like the Hippocratic Oath ("First of all, do no harm"), a religious 
creed like the Ten Commandments ("Thou Shalt not kill..."), or wise aphorisms like the sayings of 
Confucius. This is the most common way of defining "ethics": norms for conduct that distinguish 
between acceptable and unacceptable behavior.
Most people learn ethical norms at home, at school, in church, or in other social settings. 
Although most people acquire their sense of right and wrong during childhood, moral 
development occurs throughout life and human beings pass through different stages of growth as 
they mature. Ethical norms are so ubiquitous that one might be tempted to regard them as simple 
commonsense. On the other hand, if morality were nothing more than commonsense, then why are 
there so many ethical disputes and issues in our society?
One plausible explanation of these disagreements is that all people recognize some common 
ethical norms but interpret, apply, and balance them in different ways in light of their own values 
and life experiences. For example, two people could agree that murder is wrong but disagree about 
the morality of abortion because they have different understandings of what it means to be a 
human being.
Most societies also have legal rules that govern behavior, but ethical norms tend to be 
broader and more informal than laws. Although most societies use laws to enforce widely 
accepted moral standards and ethical and legal rules use similar concepts, ethics and law are not 
the same. An action may be legal but unethical or illegal but ethical. We can also use ethical 
concepts and principles to criticize, evaluate, propose, or interpret laws. Indeed, in the last century, 
many social reformers have urged citizens to disobey laws they regarded as immoral or unjust 
laws. Peaceful civil disobedience is an ethical way of protesting laws or expressing political 
viewpoints.
Another way of defining 'ethics' focuses on the disciplines that study standards of conduct, 
such as philosophy, theology, law, psychology, or sociology. For example, a "medical ethicist" is 
someone who studies ethical standards in medicine. One may also define ethics as a method, 
procedure, or perspective for deciding how to act and for analyzing complex problems and issues. 
For instance, in considering a complex issue like global warming, one may take an economic, 
ecological, political, or ethical perspective on the problem. While an economist might examine the 
cost and benefits of various policies related to global warming, an environmental ethicist could 
examine the ethical values and principles at stake.
Many different disciplines, institutions, and professions have standards for behavior that suit 
their particular aims and goals. These standards also help members of the discipline to coordinate 
their actions or activities and to establish the public's trust of the discipline. For instance, ethical 
standards govern conduct in medicine, law, engineering, and business. Ethical norms also serve 
the aims or goals of research and apply to people who conduct scientific research or other 
scholarly or creative activities. There is even a specialized discipline, research ethics, which 
studies these norms.
There are several reasons why it is important to adhere to ethical norms in research. First, 
norms promote the aims of research, such as knowledge, truth, and avoidance of error. For 
example, prohibitions against fabricating, falsifying, or misrepresenting research data promote the 
truth and minimize error.
Second, since research often involves a great deal of cooperation and coordination among 
many different people in different disciplines and institutions, ethical standards promote the values 
that are essential to collaborative work, such as trust, accountability, mutual respect, and fairness. 
For example, many ethical norms in research, such as guidelines for authorship, copyright and 
patenting policies, data sharing policies, and confidentiality rules in peer review, are designed to 
protect intellectual property interests while encouraging collaboration. Most researchers want to 
receive credit for their contributions and do not want to have their ideas stolen or disclosed 
prematurely.
Third, many of the ethical norms help to ensure that researchers can be held accountable to 
the public. For instance, federal policies on research misconduct, conflicts of interest, the human 
subjects protections, and animal care and use are necessary in order to make sure that researchers 
who are funded by public money can be held accountable to the public.
Fourth, ethical norms in research also help to build public support for research. People are 
more likely to fund a research project if they can trust the quality and integrity of research.
Finally, many of the norms of research promote a variety of other important moral and social 
values, such as social responsibility, human rights, animal welfare, compliance with the law, and 
public health and safety. Ethical lapses in research can significantly harm human and animal 
subjects, students, and the public. For example, a researcher who fabricates data in a clinical trial 
may harm or even kill patients, and a researcher who fails to abide by regulations and guidelines 
relating to radiation or biological safety may jeopardize his health and safety or the health and 
safety of staff and students.
Given the importance of ethics for the conduct of research, it should come as no surprise that 
many different professional associations, government agencies, and universities have adopted 
specific codes, rules, and policies relating to research ethics. Many government agencies have 
ethics rules for funded researchers.