The common practice of prescribing placebos to un￾witting patients illustrates the two miscalculations so 
common to minor forms of deceit: ignoring possible 
harm and failing to see how gestures assumed to be 
trivial build up into collectively undesirable practices.3
Placebos have been used since the beginning of medi-
White Lies > 2 
cine. They can be sugar pills, salt-water injections—in 
fact, any medical procedure which has no specific effect 
on a patient's condition, but which can have powerful 
psychological effects leading to relief from symptoms 
such as pain or depression. 
Placebos are prescribed with great frequency. Exactly 
how often cannot be known, the less so as physicians 
do not ordinarily talk publicly about using them. At 
times, self-deception enters in on the part of physicians, 
so that they have unwarranted faith in the powers of 
what can work only as a placebo. As with salesmanship, 
medication often involves unjustified belief in the excel￾lence of what is suggested to others. In the past, most 
remedies were of a kind that, unknown to the medical 
profession and their patients, could have only placebic 
benefits, if any. 
The derivation of "placebo," from the Latin for "I 
shall please," gives the word a benevolent ring, some￾how placing placebos beyond moral criticism and con￾juring up images of hypochondriacs whose vague 
ailments are dispelled through adroit prescriptions of 
beneficent sugar pills. Physicians often give a humorous 
tinge to instructions for prescribing these substances, 
which helps to remove them from serious ethical con￾cern. One authority wrote in a pharmacological journal 
that the placebo should be given a name previously un￾known to the patient and preferably Latin and poly￾syllabic, and added: 
[I]t is wise if it be prescribed with some assurance and
emphasis for psychotherapeutic effect. The older physi￾cians each had his favorite placebic prescriptions—one
chose tincture of Condurango, another the Fluidextract of Cimicifuga nigra.*
After all, health professionals argue, are not placebos 
3 Lying 
far less dangerous than some genuine drugs? And more 
likely to produce a cure than if nothing at all is pre￾scribed? Such a view was expressed in a letter to The 
Lancet: 
Whenever pain can be relieved with a ml of saline, why 
should we inject an opiate? Do anxieties or discomforts 
that are allayed with starch capsules require administra￾tion of a barbiturate, diazepam, or propoxyphene?5
Such a simplistic view conceals the real costs of pla￾cebos, both to individuals and to the practice of medi￾cine. First, the resort to placebos may actually prevent 
the treatment of an underlying, undiagnosed problem. 
And even if the placebo "works," the effect is often 
short-lived; the symptoms may recur, or crop up in 
other forms. Very often, the symptoms of which the pa￾tient complains are bound to go away by themselves, 
sometimes even from the mere contact with a health 
professional. In those cases, the placebo itself is un￾necessary; having recourse to it merely reinforces a 
tendency to depend upon pills or treatments where none 
is needed. 
In the aggregate, the costs of placebos are immense. 
Many millions of dollars are expended on drugs, diag￾nostic tests, and psychotherapies of a placebic nature. 
Even operations can be of this nature—a hysterectomy 
may thus be performed, not because the condition of 
the patient requires such surgery, but because she goes 
from one doctor to another seeking to have the surgery 
performed, or because she is judged to have a great fear 
of cancer which might be alleviated by the very fact of 
the operation. 
Even apart from financial and emotional costs and 
the squandering of resources, the practice of giving 
placebos is wasteful of a very precious good: the trust 
White Lies > 4 on which so much in the medical relationship depends. 
The trust of those patients who find out they have been 
duped is lost, sometimes irretrievably. They may then 
lole confidence in physicians and even in bona fide 
medication which they may need in the future. They 
may obtain for themselves more harmful drugs or at￾tach their hopes to debilitating fad cures. 
The following description of a case8
 where a placebo 
was prescribed reflects a common approach: 
A seventeen-year-old girl visited her pediatrician, who 
had been taking care of her since infancy. She went to his 
office without her parents, although her mother had made 
the appointment for her over the telephone. She told the 
pediatrician that she was very healthy, but that she 
thought she had some emotional problems. She stated 
that she was having trouble sleeping at night, that she 
was very nervous most of the day. She was a senior in 
high school and claimed she was doing quite poorly in 
most of her subjects. She was worried about what she was 
going to do next year. She was somewhat overweight. 
This, she felt, was part of her problem. She claimed she 
was not very attractive to the opposite sex and could not 
seem to "get boys interested in me." She had a few close 
friends of the same sex. 
Her life at home was quite chaotic and stressful. There 
were frequent battles with her younger brother, who was 
fourteen, and with her parents. She claimed her parents 
were always "on my back." She described her mother as 
extremely rigid and her father as a disciplinarian, who 
was quite old-fashioned in his values. 
In all, she spent about twenty minutes talking with her 
pediatrician. She told him that what she thought she really 
needed was tranquilizers, and that that was the reason she 
came. She felt that this was an extremely difficult year for 
her, and if she could have something to calm her nerves 
until she got over her current crises, everything would go 
better. 
5 Lying 
The pediatrician told her that he did not really believe 
in giving tranquilizers to a girl of her age. He said he 
thought it would be a bad precedent for her to establish. 
She was very insistent, however, and claimed that if he 
did not give her tranquilizers, she would "get them some￾how." Finally, he agreed to call her pharmacy and order 
medication for her nerves. She accepted graciously. He 
suggested that she call him in a few days to let him know 
how things were going. He also called her parents to say 
that he had a talk with her and was giving her some medi￾cine that might help her nerves. 
Five days later, the girl called the pediatrician back to 
say that the pills were really working well. She claimed 
that she had calmed down a great deal, that she was work￾ing things out better with her parents, and had a new 
outlook on life. He suggested that she keep taking them 
twice a day for the rest of the school year. She agreed. 
A month later, the girl ran out of pills and called her 
pediatrician for a refill. She found that he was away on 
vacation. She was quite distraught at not having any 
medication left, so she called her uncle who was a surgeon 
in the next town. He called the pharmacy to renew her 
pills and, in speaking to the druggist, found out that they 
were only vitamins. He told the girl that the pills were 
only vitamins and that she could get them over the 
counter and didn't really need him to refill them. The girl 
became very distraught, feeling that she had been de￾ceived and betrayed by her pediatrician. Her parents, 
when they heard, commented that they thought the pedia￾trician was "very clever." 
The patients who do not discover the deception and 
are left believing that a placebic remedy has worked 
may continue to rely on it under the wrong circum￾stances. This is especially true with drugs such as anti￾biotics, which are sometimes used as placebos and 
sometimes for their specific action. Many parents, for 
example, come to believe that they must ask for the 
White Lies > 6 
prescription of antibiotics every time their child has a 
fever or a cold. The fact that so many doctors accede to 
such requests perpetuates the dependence of these fami￾lies on medical care they do not need and weakens their 
ability to cope with health problems. Worst of all, those 
children who cannot tolerate antibiotics may have se￾vere reactions, sometimes fatal, to such unnecessary 
medication.7 
Such deceptive practices, by their very nature, tend 
to escape the normal restraints of accountability and 
can therefore spread more easily than others. There are 
many instances in which an innocuous-seeming practice 
has grown to become a large-scale and more dangerous 
one. Although warnings against the "entering wedge" 
are often rhetorical devices, they can at times express 
justifiable caution; especially when there are great 
pressures to move along the undesirable path and when 
the safeguards are insufficient. 
In this perspective, there is much reason for concern 
about placebos. The safeguards against this practice 
are few or nonexistent—both because it is secretive in 
nature and because it is condoned but rarely carefully 
discussed in the medical literature.8
 And the pressures 
are very great, and growing stronger, from drug com￾panies, patients eager for cures, and busy physicians, 
for more medication, whether it is needed or not. Given 
this lack of safeguards and these strong pressures, the 
use of placebos can spread in a number of ways. 
The clearest danger lies in the gradual shift from 
pharmacologically inert placebos to more active ones. 
It is not always easy to distinguish completely inert sub￾stances from somewhat active ones and these in turn 
from more active ones. It may be hard to distinguish 
between a quantity of an active substance so low that it 
has little or no effect and quantities that have some 
7 Lying 
effect. It is not always clear to doctors whether patients 
require an inert placebo or possibly a more active one, 
and there can be the temptation to resort to an active 
one just in case it might also have a specific effect. It is 
also much easier to deceive a patient with a medication 
that is known to be "real" and to have power. One re￾cent textbook in medicine goes so far as to advocate the 
use of small doses of effective compounds as placebos 
rather than inert substances—because it is important 
for both the doctor and the patient to believe in the 
treatment! This shift is made easier because the dangers 
and side effects of active agents are not always known 
or considered important by the physician. 
Meanwhile, the number of patients receiving placebos 
increases as more and more people seek and receive 
medical care and as their desire for instant, push-button 
alleviation of symptoms is stimulated by drug advertis￾ing and by rising expectations of what science can do. 
The use of placebos for children grows as well, and the 
temptations to manipulate the truth are less easily re￾sisted once such great inroads have already been made. 
Deception by placebo can also spread from therapy 
and diagnosis to experimentation. Much experimenta￾tion with placebos is honest and consented to by the 
experimental subjects, especially since the advent of 
strict rules governing such experimentation. But griev￾ous abuses have taken place where placebos were 
given to unsuspecting subjects who believed they had 
received another substance. In 1971, for example, a 
number of Mexican-American women applied to a 
family-planning clinic for contraceptives. Some of them 
were given oral contraceptives and others were given 
placebos, or dummy pills that looked like the real thing. 
Without fully informed consent, the women were being 
White Lies > 8 
used in an experiment to explore the side eSects of 
various contraceptive pills. Some of those who were 
given placebos experienced a predictable side effect— 
they became pregnant. The investigators neither as￾sumed financial responsibility for the babies nor indi￾cated any concern about having bypassed the "informed 
consent" that is required in ethical experiments with hu￾man beings. One contented himself with the observation 
that if only the law had permitted it, he could have 
aborted the pregnant women! 
The failure to think about the ethical problems in such 
a case stems at least in part from the innocent-seeming 
white lies so often told in giving placebos. The spread 
from therapy to experimentation and from harmlessness 
to its opposite often goes unnoticed in part because of 
the triviality believed to be connected with placebos as 
white lies. This lack of foresight and concern is most 
frequent when the subjects in the experiment are least 
likely to object or defend themselves; as with the poor, 
the institutionalized, and the very young. 
In view of all these ways in which placebo usage can 
spread, it is not enough to look at each incident of 
manipulation in isolation, no matter how benevolent it 
may be. When the costs and benefits are weighed, not 
only the individual consequences must be considered, 
but also the cumulative ones. Reports of deceptive prac￾tices inevitably leak out, and the resulting suspicion is 
heightened by the anxiety which threats to health always 
create. And so even the health professionals who do not 
mislead their patients are injured by those who do; the 
entire institution of medicine is threatened by practices 
lacking in candor, however harmless the results may 
appear in some individual cases. 
This is not to say that all placebos must be ruled out; 
9 Lying 
merely that they cannot be excused as innocuous. They 
should be prescribed but rarely, and only after a careful 
diagnosis and consideration of non-deceptive alternatives; they should be used in experimentation only after 
subjects have consented to their use.