The medicines they helped develop are credited with improving the lives of millions. And 
now three researchers working in the U.S., Japan and China have won the 2015 Nobel 
Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Among the winners: William C. Campbell of Drew 
University in Madison, N.J., for his work on the roundworm parasite.
Born in Ireland, Campbell shares half the prize with Satoshi Omura of Kitasato 
University in Japan, who has researched the same parasite. The other half of the award 
goes to Youyou Tu of the China Academy of Traditional Medicine in Beijing, China, for 
her work in developing therapies for malaria.
Taken together, the three “have transformed the treatment of parasitic diseases,”
according to the Nobel Prize committee. “The global impact of their discoveries and the 
resulting benefit to mankind are immeasurable.”
All of the researchers were born in the 1930s; much of their key research was published 
around 1980. And their findings came after intense searches for existing natural 
components that might help fight diseases.
Working in Japan, Omura isolated novel strains of streptomyces bacteria from soil 
samples that not only had antibacterial components, but also had the potential to combat 
other harmful microorganisms.
In the U.S., Campbell explored the effects of Omura’s streptomyces cultures and found 
that, as the Nobel committee says, “a component from one of the cultures was remarkably 
efficient against parasites in domestic and farm animals.”
The active compound, called avermectin, was further developed to become ivermectin, 
which is now used around the world to protect people and animals from a range of 
parasites, from river blindness to lymphatic filariasis (also known as elephantiasis).
“I humbly accept this prize,” Omura said when he was contacted by the Nobel committee 
Monday. Saying there are “many, many researchers” who are doing important work, he 
added, “I may be very, very lucky.”
Anecdotes have long held that Omura found the life-changing soil sample while he was 
doing what he loved: playing golf. He clarified that a bit Monday, saying it had happened 
“very close to the golf course.”
Tu revolutionized how malaria is fought by applying ancient techniques from China’s 
traditional herbal medicine to isolate and purify a component from the plant Artemisia 
annua that could fight malaria in animals and people.
Tu used those insights to extract the component, now known as artemisinin, and to show 
that it could beat malaria. The Nobel committee says artemisinin represented “a new class 
of antimalarial agents that rapidly kill the malaria parasites at an early stage of their 
development, which explains its unprecedented potency in the treatment of severe 
malaria.”
The plant that yielded the compound, Artemisia annua, is also known as qinghao, sweet 
wormwood and sweet Annie. Its use in traditional Chinese medicine dates back more 
than 2,000 years.